add plugin / module testing docs (#15886)
backstage/backstage: docs/backend-system/building-plugins-and-modules/02-testing.md

description: Learn how to test your backend plugins and modules
---

Utilities for testing backend plugins and modules are available in
`@backstage/backend-test-utils`. This section describes those facilities.

## Testing Backend Plugins

To facilitate testing of backend plugins, the `@backstage/backend-test-utils`
package provides a `startTestBackend` function which starts up an entire backend
harness, complete with a number of mock services. You can then provide overrides

> for services whose behavior you need to adjust for the test run.

Reviewer: I think it could be good to introduce and explain the `features` option here as well, essentially the test subject(s)

Author: Agreed, clarified that!

The function returns an HTTP server instance which can be used together with
e.g. `supertest` to easily test the actual REST service surfaces of plugins who
register routes with [the HTTP router service
API](../core-services/01-index.md).

```ts
import { mockServices, startTestBackend } from '@backstage/backend-test-utils';
import request from 'supertest';
import { myPlugin } from './plugin.ts';

describe('myPlugin', () => {
  it('can serve values from config', async () => {
    const fakeConfig = { myPlugin: { value: 7 } };

    const { server } = await startTestBackend({
      features: [myPlugin()],
      services: [mockServices.config.factory({ data: fakeConfig })],
    });

    const response = await request(server).get('/api/example/get-value');
    expect(response.status).toBe(200);
    expect(response.body).toEqual({ value: 7 });
  });
});
```

> This example shows how to easily access the factories for mock services and
> passing options to them, which will override the default mocks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example shows how to access the mock service factories and
pass options to them, which will override the default mock services.
```

          ctx.set('Content-Type', 'application/json'),
          ctx.body(JSON.stringify({ value: 7 })),
        );
      }),
    );

    // exercise your plugin or service as usual, with real clients
  });
});
```

## Testing Database Interactions

The `@backstage/backend-test-utils` package includes facilities for testing your
plugins' interactions with databases, including spinning up `testcontainers`
powered Docker images with real database engines to connect to.

The base setup for such a test could look as follows:

```ts
// MyDatabaseClass.test.ts
import { TestDatabaseId, TestDatabases } from '@backstage/backend-test-utils';
import {
  MyDatabaseClass,
  applyDatabaseMigrations,
  type FooTableRow,
} from './MyDatabaseClass';

describe('MyDatabaseClass', () => {
  // Change this to the set of constants that you actually actively intend to
  // support. Make sure to create only one TestDatabases instance per file,
  // since spinning up "physical" databases to test against is much costlier
  // than creating the "logical" databases within them that the individual
  // tests use.
  const databases = TestDatabases.create({
    ids: ['POSTGRES_13', 'POSTGRES_9', 'SQLITE_3'],

>   });

Reviewer: Perhaps mention that this must be called at top-level within a describe block as well?

Author: Good point, added

  // Just an example of how to conveniently bundle up the setup code

>   async function createSut(databaseId: TestDatabaseId) {

Reviewer: I think "subject" might be a more commonly understood term?

Author: I dunno honestly, SUT is the one I've heard 🤷 :hahabusiness: :veryjava:

Author: Changed it to subject though, that reads better and feels less corporate :)

    const knex = await databases.init(databaseId);
    const sut = new MyDatabaseClass({ database: knex });
    await sut.runMigrations();
    return { knex, sut };
  }

  describe('foo', () => {
    // Easily run the exact same test onto all supported databases
    it.each(databases.eachSupportedId())(
      'should run foo on %p',
      async databaseId => {
        const { knex, sut } = await createSut(databaseId);
        // raw knex is available for underlying manipulation
        await knex<FooTableRow>('foo').insert({ value: 2 });
        // drive your system under test as usual
        await expect(sut.foos()).resolves.toEqual([{ value: 2 }]);
      });
  });
```

If you want to pass the test database instance into backend plugins or services,
you can supply it in the form of a mock instance of `coreServices.database` to
your test database.

```ts
const { knex, sut } = await createSut(databaseId);
const { server } = await startTestBackend({
  features: [myPlugin()],

>   services: [[coreServices.database, { getClient: async () => knex }]],

Reviewer: We should definitely have a utility for this :grin:

Author: Indeed. I'll try to get some time to clean that up
